---
title: First!
description: This is the first post.
date: 2021-05-18T16:41:11+07:00
author: Hans5958
---

This is the first post.

## Scene 1.  A room in the castle.
*Enter King Claudius, Queen Gertrude, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern*

**King Claudius**

And can you, by no drift of circumstance,  
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,  
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet  
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

**Rosencrantz**

He does confess he feels himself distracted;  
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

**Guildenstern**

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,  
But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,  
When we would bring him on to some confession  
Of his true state.

**Queen Gertrude**

Did he receive you well?

**Rosencrantz**

Most like a gentleman.

**Guildenstern**

But with much forcing of his disposition.

**Rosencrantz**

Niggard of question; but, of our demands,  
Most free in his reply.

**Queen Gertrude**

Did you assay him  
To any pastime?

**Rosencrantz**

Madam, it so fell out, that certain players  
We o'er-raught on the way: of these we told him;  
And there did seem in him a kind of joy  
To hear of it: they are about the court,  
And, as I think, they have already order  
This night to play before him.

**Lord Polonius**

'Tis most true:  
And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties  
To hear and see the matter.

**King Claudius**

With all my heart; and it doth much content me  
To hear him so inclined.  
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,  
And drive his purpose on to these delights.

**Rosencrantz**

We shall, my lord.

*Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN*


**King Claudius**

Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;  
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,  
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here  
Affront Ophelia:  
Her father and myself, lawful espials,  
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen,  
We may of their encounter frankly judge,  
And gather by him, as he is behaved,  
If 't be the affliction of his love or no  
That thus he suffers for.

**Queen Gertrude**

I shall obey you.  
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish  
That your good beauties be the happy cause  
Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues  
Will bring him to his wonted way again,  
To both your honours.

**Ophelia**

Madam, I wish it may.

*Exit QUEEN GERTRUDE*


**Lord Polonius**

Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,  
We will bestow ourselves.
*To OPHELIA*  
Read on this book;  
That show of such an exercise may colour  
Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--  
'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage  
And pious action we do sugar o'er  
The devil himself.

**King Claudius**

*Aside*          O, 'tis too true!  
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!  
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,  
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it  
Than is my deed to my most painted word:  
O heavy burthen!

**Lord Polonius**

I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord.


*Exeunt KING CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS*
*Enter HAMLET*


**Hamlet**

To be, or not to be: that is the question:  
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer  
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,  
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,  
And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;  
No more; and by a sleep to say we end  
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks  
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation  
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;  
To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;  
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come  
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,  
Must give us pause: there's the respect  
That makes calamity of so long life;  
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,  
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,  
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,  
The insolence of office and the spurns  
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,  
When he himself might his quietus make  
With a bare bodkin? who would these fardels bear,  
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,  
But that the dread of something after death,  
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn  
No traveller returns, puzzles the will  
And makes us rather bear those ills we have  
Than fly to others that we know not of?  
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;  
And thus the native hue of resolution  
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,  
And enterprises of great pitch and moment  
With this regard their currents turn awry,  
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now!  
The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons  
Be all my sins remember'd.

**Ophelia**

Good my lord,  
How does your honour for this many a day?

**Hamlet**

I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

**Ophelia**

My lord, I have remembrances of yours,  
That I have longed long to re-deliver;  
I pray you, now receive them.

**Hamlet**

No, not I;  
I never gave you aught.

**Ophelia**

My honour'd lord, you know right well you did;  
And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed  
As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,  
Take these again; for to the noble mind  
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.  
There, my lord.

**Hamlet**

Ha, ha! are you honest?

**Ophelia**

My lord?

**Hamlet**

Are you fair?

**Ophelia**

What means your lordship?

**Hamlet**

That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should  
admit no discourse to your beauty.

**Ophelia**

Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than  
with honesty?

**Hamlet**

Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner  
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the  
force of honesty can translate beauty into his  
likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the  
time gives it proof. I did love you once.

**Ophelia**

Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

**Hamlet**

You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot  
so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of  
it: I loved you not.

**Ophelia**

I was the more deceived.

**Hamlet**

Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a  
breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest;  
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it  
were better my mother had not borne me: I am very  
proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at  
my beck than I have thoughts to put them in,  
imagination to give them shape, or time to act them  
in. What should such fellows as I do crawling  
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves,  
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.  
Where's your father?

**Ophelia**

At home, my lord.

**Hamlet**

Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the  
fool no where but in's own house. Farewell.

**Ophelia**

O, help him, you sweet heavens!

**Hamlet**

If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for  
thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as  
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a  
nunnery, go: farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs  
marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough  
what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go,  
and quickly too. Farewell.

**Ophelia**

O heavenly powers, restore him!

**Hamlet**

I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God  
has given you one face, and you make yourselves  
another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and  
nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness  
your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't; it hath  
made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages:  
those that are married already, all but one, shall  
live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a  
nunnery, go.

*Exit*


**Ophelia**

O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!  
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword;  
The expectancy and rose of the fair state,  
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,  
The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!  
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,  
That suck'd the honey of his music vows,  
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,  
Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;  
That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth  
Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,  
To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

*Re-enter KING CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS*


**King Claudius**

Love! his affections do not that way tend;  
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,  
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,  
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;  
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose  
Will be some danger: which for to prevent,  
I have in quick determination  
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England,  
For the demand of our neglected tribute  
Haply the seas and countries different  
With variable objects shall expel  
This something-settled matter in his heart,  
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus  
From fashion of himself. What think you on't?

**Lord Polonius**

It shall do well: but yet do I believe  
The origin and commencement of his grief  
Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!  
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;  
We heard it all. My lord, do as you please;  
But, if you hold it fit, after the play  
Let his queen mother all alone entreat him  
To show his grief: let her be round with him;  
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear  
Of all their conference. If she find him not,  
To England send him, or confine him where  
Your wisdom best shall think.

**King Claudius**

It shall be so:  
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.

*Exeunt*

## Scene 2.  A hall in the castle.
*Enter HAMLET and Players*


**Hamlet**

Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to  
you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it,  
as many of your players do, I had as lief the  
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air  
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;  
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,  
the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget  
a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it  
offends me to the soul to hear a robustious  
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to  
very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who  
for the most part are capable of nothing but  
inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such  
a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant; it  
out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.

**First Player**

I warrant your honour.

**Hamlet**

Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion  
be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the  
word to the action; with this special observance o'erstep not  
the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is  
from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the  
first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the  
mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,  
scorn her own image, and the very age and body of  
the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone,  
or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful  
laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the  
censure of the which one must in your allowance  
o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be  
players that I have seen play, and heard others  
praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,  
that, neither having the accent of Christians nor  
the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so  
strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of  
nature's journeymen had made men and not made them  
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

**First Player**

I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us,  
sir.

**Hamlet**

O, reform it altogether. And let those that play  
your clowns speak no more than is set down for them;  
for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to  
set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh  
too; though, in the mean time, some necessary  
question of the play be then to be considered:  
that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition  
in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.
*Exeunt Players*
*Enter POLONIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN*  
How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work?

**Lord Polonius**

And the queen too, and that presently.

**Hamlet**

Bid the players make haste.
*Exit POLONIUS*  
Will you two help to hasten them?

##### Rosencrantz

**Guildenstern**

We will, my lord.


*Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN*


**Hamlet**

What ho! Horatio!

*Enter HORATIO*


**Horatio**

Here, sweet lord, at your service.

**Hamlet**

Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man  
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

**Horatio**

O, my dear lord,--

**Hamlet**

Nay, do not think I flatter;  
For what advancement may I hope from thee  
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits,  
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?  
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,  
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee  
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?  
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice  
And could of men distinguish, her election  
Hath seal'd thee for herself; for thou hast been  
As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,  
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards  
Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those  
Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled,  
That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger  
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man  
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him  
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,  
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--  
There is a play to-night before the king;  
One scene of it comes near the circumstance  
Which I have told thee of my father's death:  
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,  
Even with the very comment of thy soul  
Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt  
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,  
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,  
And my imaginations are as foul  
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;  
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,  
And after we will both our judgments join  
In censure of his seeming.

**Horatio**

Well, my lord:  
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,  
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

**Hamlet**

They are coming to the play; I must be idle:  
Get you a place.

*Danish march. A flourish. Enter KING CLAUDIUS,*
*QUEEN GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ,*
*GUILDENSTERN, and others*


**King Claudius**

How fares our cousin Hamlet?

**Hamlet**

Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish: I eat  
the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.

**King Claudius**

I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words  
are not mine.

**Hamlet**

No, nor mine now.
*To POLONIUS*  
My lord, you played once i' the university, you say?

**Lord Polonius**

That did I, my lord; and was accounted a good actor.

**Hamlet**

What did you enact?

**Lord Polonius**

I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i' the  
Capitol; Brutus killed me.

**Hamlet**

It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf  
there. Be the players ready?

**Rosencrantz**

Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.

**Queen Gertrude**

Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

**Hamlet**

No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.

**Lord Polonius**

*To KING CLAUDIUS*  O, ho! do you mark that?

**Hamlet**

Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

*Lying down at OPHELIA's feet*


**Ophelia**

No, my lord.

**Hamlet**

I mean, my head upon your lap?

**Ophelia**

Ay, my lord.

**Hamlet**

Do you think I meant country matters?

**Ophelia**

I think nothing, my lord.

**Hamlet**

That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.

**Ophelia**

What is, my lord?

**Hamlet**

Nothing.

**Ophelia**

You are merry, my lord.

**Hamlet**

Who, I?

**Ophelia**

Ay, my lord.

**Hamlet**

O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do  
but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my  
mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.

**Ophelia**

Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

**Hamlet**

So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for  
I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens! die two  
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's  
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half  
a year: but, by'r lady, he must build churches,  
then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with  
the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For, O, for, O,  
the hobby-horse is forgot.'
*Hautboys play. The dumb-show enters*


*Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen
*embracing him, and he her. She kneels, and makes
*show of protestation unto him. He takes her up,
*and declines his head upon her neck: lays him down
*upon a bank of flowers: she, seeing him asleep,
*leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
*crown, kisses it, and pours poison in the King's
*ears, and exit. The Queen returns; finds the King
*dead, and makes passionate action. The Poisoner,
*with some two or three Mutes, comes in again,
*seeming to lament with her. The dead body is
*carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with
*gifts: she seems loath and unwilling awhile, but
*in the end accepts his love*

*Exeunt*


**Ophelia**

What means this, my lord?

**Hamlet**

Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.

**Ophelia**

Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

*Enter Prologue*


**Hamlet**

We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot  
keep counsel; they'll tell all.

**Ophelia**

Will he tell us what this show meant?

**Hamlet**

Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you  
ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

**Ophelia**

You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the play.

**Prologue**

For us, and for our tragedy,  
Here stooping to your clemency,  
We beg your hearing patiently.

*Exit*


**Hamlet**

Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?

**Ophelia**

'Tis brief, my lord.

**Hamlet**

As woman's love.

*Enter two Players, King and Queen*


**Player King**

Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round  
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,  
And thirty dozen moons with borrow'd sheen  
About the world have times twelve thirties been,  
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands  
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

**Player Queen**

So many journeys may the sun and moon  
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!  
But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,  
So far from cheer and from your former state,  
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,  
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:  
For women's fear and love holds quantity;  
In neither aught, or in extremity.  
Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know;  
And as my love is sized, my fear is so:  
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;  
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

**Player King**

'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
My operant powers their functions leave to do:  
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,  
Honour'd, beloved; and haply one as kind  
For husband shalt thou--

**Player Queen**

O, confound the rest!  
Such love must needs be treason in my breast:  
In second husband let me be accurst!  
None wed the second but who kill'd the first.

**Hamlet**

*Aside*  Wormwood, wormwood.

**Player Queen**

The instances that second marriage move  
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love:  
A second time I kill my husband dead,  
When second husband kisses me in bed.

**Player King**

I do believe you think what now you speak;  
But what we do determine oft we break.  
Purpose is but the slave to memory,  
Of violent birth, but poor validity;  
Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree;  
But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be.  
Most necessary 'tis that we forget  
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:  
What to ourselves in passion we propose,  
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.  
The violence of either grief or joy  
Their own enactures with themselves destroy:  
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;  
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.  
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange  
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;  
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,  
Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.  
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies;  
The poor advanced makes friends of enemies.  
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend;  
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,  
And who in want a hollow friend doth try,  
Directly seasons him his enemy.  
But, orderly to end where I begun,  
Our wills and fates do so contrary run  
That our devices still are overthrown;  
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:  
So think thou wilt no second husband wed;  
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

**Player Queen**

Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!  
Sport and repose lock from me day and night!  
To desperation turn my trust and hope!  
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!  
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy  
Meet what I would have well and it destroy!  
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,  
If, once a widow, ever I be wife!

**Hamlet**

If she should break it now!

**Player King**

'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile;  
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile  
The tedious day with sleep.

*Sleeps*


**Player Queen**

Sleep rock thy brain,  
And never come mischance between us twain!

*Exit*


**Hamlet**

Madam, how like you this play?

**Queen Gertrude**

The lady protests too much, methinks.

**Hamlet**

O, but she'll keep her word.

**King Claudius**

Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in 't?

**Hamlet**

No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence  
i' the world.

**King Claudius**

What do you call the play?

**Hamlet**

The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play  
is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is  
the duke's name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see  
anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o'  
that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it  
touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our  
withers are unwrung.
*Enter LUCIANUS*  
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

**Ophelia**

You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

**Hamlet**

I could interpret between you and your love, if I  
could see the puppets dallying.

**Ophelia**

You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

**Hamlet**

It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

**Ophelia**

Still better, and worse.

**Hamlet**

So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer;  
pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:  
'the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.'

**Lucianus**

Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;  
Confederate season, else no creature seeing;  
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,  
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,  
Thy natural magic and dire property,  
On wholesome life usurp immediately.

*Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears*


**Hamlet**

He poisons him i' the garden for's estate. His  
name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in  
choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer  
gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

[III of Shakespeare's Hamlet, Claudius and the theater.JPG|thumb|right|King Claudius and the theater by [[w:Devéria|Devéria]([File:Act)] and [Boulanger|Boulanger]([w:Gustave)].]]

**Ophelia**

The king rises.

**Hamlet**

What, frighted with false fire!

**Queen Gertrude**

How fares my lord?

**Lord Polonius**

Give o'er the play.

**King Claudius**

Give me some light: away!

**All**

Lights, lights, lights!

*Exeunt all but HAMLET and HORATIO*


**Hamlet**

Why, let the stricken deer go weep,  
The hart ungalled play;  
For some must watch, while some must sleep:  
So runs the world away.  
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if  
the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me--with two  
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a  
fellowship in a cry of players, sir?

**Horatio**

Half a share.

**Hamlet**

A whole one, I.  
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,  
This realm dismantled was  
Of Jove himself; and now reigns here  
A very, very--pajock.

**Horatio**

You might have rhymed.

**Hamlet**

O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a  
thousand pound. Didst perceive?

**Horatio**

Very well, my lord.

**Hamlet**

Upon the talk of the poisoning?

**Horatio**

I did very well note him.

**Hamlet**

Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders!  
For if the king like not the comedy,  
Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.  
Come, some music!

*Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN*


**Guildenstern**

Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.

**Hamlet**

Sir, a whole history.

**Guildenstern**

The king, sir,--

**Hamlet**

Ay, sir, what of him?

**Guildenstern**

Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.

**Hamlet**

With drink, sir?

**Guildenstern**

No, my lord, rather with choler.

**Hamlet**

Your wisdom should show itself more richer to  
signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him  
to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far  
more choler.

**Guildenstern**

Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and  
start not so wildly from my affair.

**Hamlet**

I am tame, sir: pronounce.

**Guildenstern**

The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of  
spirit, hath sent me to you.

**Hamlet**

You are welcome.

**Guildenstern**

Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right  
breed. If it shall please you to make me a  
wholesome answer, I will do your mother's  
commandment: if not, your pardon and my return  
shall be the end of my business.

**Hamlet**

Sir, I cannot.

**Guildenstern**

What, my lord?

**Hamlet**

Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased: but,  
sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command;  
or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no  
more, but to the matter: my mother, you say,--

**Rosencrantz**

Then thus she says; your behavior hath struck her  
into amazement and admiration.

**Hamlet**

O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But  
is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's  
admiration? Impart.

**Rosencrantz**

She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you  
go to bed.

**Hamlet**

We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have  
you any further trade with us?

**Rosencrantz**

My lord, you once did love me.

**Hamlet**

So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.

**Rosencrantz**

Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you  
do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if  
you deny your griefs to your friend.

**Hamlet**

Sir, I lack advancement.

**Rosencrantz**

How can that be, when you have the voice of the king  
himself for your succession in Denmark?

**Hamlet**

Ay, but sir, 'While the grass grows,'--the proverb  
is something musty.
*Re-enter Players with recorders*  
O, the recorders! let me see one. To withdraw with  
you:--why do you go about to recover the wind of me,  
as if you would drive me into a toil?

**Guildenstern**

O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too  
unmannerly.

**Hamlet**

I do not well understand that. Will you play upon  
this pipe?

**Guildenstern**

My lord, I cannot.

**Hamlet**

I pray you.

**Guildenstern**

Believe me, I cannot.

**Hamlet**

I do beseech you.

**Guildenstern**

I know no touch of it, my lord.

**Hamlet**

'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with  
your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your  
mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.  
Look you, these are the stops.

**Guildenstern**

But these cannot I command to any utterance of  
harmony; I have not the skill.

**Hamlet**

Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of  
me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know  
my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my  
mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to  
the top of my compass: and there is much music,  
excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot  
you make it speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am  
easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what  
instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you  
cannot play upon me.
*Enter POLONIUS*  
God bless you, sir!

**Lord Polonius**

My lord, the queen would speak with you, and  
presently.

**Hamlet**

Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?

**Lord Polonius**

By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.

**Hamlet**

Methinks it is like a weasel.

**Lord Polonius**

It is backed like a weasel.

**Hamlet**

Or like a whale?

**Lord Polonius**

Very like a whale.

**Hamlet**

Then I will come to my mother by and by. They fool  
me to the top of my bent. I will come by and by.

**Lord Polonius**

I will say so.

**Hamlet**

By and by is easily said.
*Exit POLONIUS*  
Leave me, friends.
*Exeunt all but HAMLET*  
'Tis now the very witching time of night,  
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out  
Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,  
And do such bitter business as the day  
Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother.  
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever  
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:  
Let me be cruel, not unnatural:  
I will speak daggers to her, but use none;  
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;  
How in my words soever she be shent,  
To give them seals never, my soul, consent!

*Exit*

## Scene 3.  A room in the castle.
*Enter King Claudius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern*

**King Claudius**

I like him not, nor stands it safe with us  
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;  
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,  
And he to England shall along with you:  
The terms of our estate may not endure  
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow  
Out of his lunacies.

**Guildenstern**

We will ourselves provide:  
Most holy and religious fear it is  
To keep those many many bodies safe  
That live and feed upon your majesty.

**Rosencrantz**

The single and peculiar life is bound,  
With all the strength and armour of the mind,  
To keep itself from noyance; but much more  
That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest  
The lives of many. The cease of majesty  
Dies not alone; but, like a gulf, doth draw  
What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,  
Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,  
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things  
Are mortised and adjoin'd; which, when it falls,  
Each small annexment, petty consequence,  
Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone  
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

**King Claudius**

Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;  
For we will fetters put upon this fear,  
Which now goes too free-footed.

##### Rosencrantz

**Guildenstern**

We will haste us.


*Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN*
*Enter POLONIUS*


**Lord Polonius**

My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:  
Behind the arras I'll convey myself,  
To hear the process; and warrant she'll tax him home:  
And, as you said, and wisely was it said,  
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear  
The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:  
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,  
And tell you what I know.

**King Claudius**

Thanks, dear my lord.
*Exit POLONIUS*  
O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven;  
It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,  
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,  
Though inclination be as sharp as will:  
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;  
And, like a man to double business bound,  
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,  
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand  
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,  
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens  
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy  
But to confront the visage of offence?  
And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,  
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;  
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer  
Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murder'?  
That cannot be; since I am still possess'd  
Of those effects for which I did the murder,  
My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.  
May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?  
In the corrupted currents of this world  
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,  
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself  
Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above;  
There is no shuffling, there the action lies  
In his true nature; and we ourselves compell'd,  
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,  
To give in evidence. What then? what rests?  
Try what repentance can: what can it not?  
Yet what can it when one can not repent?  
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!  
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,  
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!  
Bow, stubborn knees; and, heart with strings of steel,  
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!  
All may be well.


*Retires and kneels*
*Enter HAMLET*

[at Prayer Hamlet 3-3 Delacroix 1844.JPG|thumb|right|Hamlet comes upon the king at prayer, but does not kill him. Artist: [[w:Eugène Delacroix|Delacroix]([File:Claudius)].]]
**Hamlet**

Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;  
And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven;  
And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd:  
A villain kills my father; and for that,  
I, his sole son, do this same villain send  
To heaven.  
O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.  
He took my father grossly, full of bread;  
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;  
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?  
But in our circumstance and course of thought,  
'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,  
To take him in the purging of his soul,  
When he is fit and season'd for his passage?  
No!  
Up, sword; and know thou a more horrid hent:  
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,  
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;  
At gaming, swearing, or about some act  
That has no relish of salvation in't;  
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,  
And that his soul may be as damn'd and black  
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:  
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

*Exit*


**King Claudius**

*Rising*  My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:  
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

*Exit*

## Scene 4.  The Queen's closet.
*Enter Queen Gertrude and Polonius*

**Lord Polonius**

He will come straight. Look you lay home to him:  
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,  
And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between  
Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here.  
Pray you, be round with him.

**Hamlet**

*Within*  Mother, mother, mother!

**Queen Gertrude**

I'll warrant you,  
Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming.


*POLONIUS hides behind the arras*
*Enter HAMLET*


**Hamlet**

Now, mother, what's the matter?

**Queen Gertrude**

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

**Hamlet**

Mother, you have my father much offended.

**Queen Gertrude**

Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

**Hamlet**

Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

**Queen Gertrude**

Why, how now, Hamlet!

**Hamlet**

What's the matter now?

**Queen Gertrude**

Have you forgot me?

**Hamlet**

No, by the rood, not so:  
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife;  
And--would it were not so!--you are my mother.

**Queen Gertrude**

Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.

**Hamlet**

Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;  
You go not till I set you up a glass  
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

**Queen Gertrude**

What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?  
Help, help, ho!

**Lord Polonius**

*Behind*  What, ho! help, help, help!

[and the slain Polonius's body* (1835), by [[w:Eugène Delacroix|Delacroix]([File:Hamlet-before-the-body-of-polonius.jpg|thumb|right|*Hamlet)].]]

**Hamlet**

*Drawing*  How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead!

*Makes a pass through the arras*


**Lord Polonius**

*Behind*  O, I am slain!

*Falls and dies*


**Queen Gertrude**

O me, what hast thou done?

**Hamlet**

Nay, I know not:  
Is it the king?

**Queen Gertrude**

O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

**Hamlet**

A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,  
As kill a king, and marry with his brother.

**Queen Gertrude**

As kill a king!

**Hamlet**

Ay, lady, 'twas my word.
*Lifts up the array and discovers POLONIUS*  
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!  
I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune;  
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.  
Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,  
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall,  
If it be made of penetrable stuff,  
If damned custom have not brass'd it so  
That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

**Queen Gertrude**

What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue  
In noise so rude against me?

**Hamlet**

Such an act  
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,  
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose  
From the fair forehead of an innocent love  
And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows  
As false as dicers' oaths: O, such a deed  
As from the body of contraction plucks  
The very soul, and sweet religion makes  
A rhapsody of words: heaven's face doth glow:  
Yea, this solidity and compound mass,  
With tristful visage, as against the doom,  
Is thought-sick at the act.

**Queen Gertrude**

Ay me, what act,  
That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?

{{anchor|counterfeit presentment}}<!--this anchor referenced at [Harvard statue]([w:John)]-->
**Hamlet**

Look here, upon this picture, and on this,  
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.  
See, what a grace was seated on this brow;  
Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;  
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;  
A station like the herald Mercury  
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;  
A combination and a form indeed,  
Where every god did seem to set his seal,  
To give the world assurance of a man:  
This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:  
Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,  
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?  
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,  
And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?  
You cannot call it love; for at your age  
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,  
And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment  
Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,  
Else could you not have motion; but sure, that sense  
Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,  
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd  
But it reserved some quantity of choice,  
To serve in such a difference. What devil was't  
That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?  
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,  
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,  
Or but a sickly part of one true sense  
Could not so mope.  
O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,  
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,  
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,  
And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame  
When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,  
Since frost itself as actively doth burn  
And reason panders will.

**Queen Gertrude**

O Hamlet, speak no more:  
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul;  
And there I see such black and grained spots  
As will not leave their tinct.

**Hamlet**

Nay, but to live  
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,  
Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love  
Over the nasty sty,--

**Queen Gertrude**

O, speak to me no more;  
These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears;  
No more, sweet Hamlet!

**Hamlet**

A murderer and a villain;  
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe  
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;  
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,  
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,  
And put it in his pocket!

**Queen Gertrude**

No more!

[(Abildgaard).jpg|thumb|right|*Hamlet Shows His Mother the Ghost of His Father* (ca. 1778) by [[w:Nicolai Abraham Abildgaard|Nicolai Abraham Abildgaard]([File:Hamlet)].]]

**Hamlet**

A king of shreds and patches,--
*Enter Ghost*  
Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,  
You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?

**Queen Gertrude**

Alas, he's mad!

**Hamlet**

Do you not come your tardy son to chide,  
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by  
The important acting of your dread command? O, say!

**Ghost**

Do not forget: this visitation  
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.  
But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:  
O, step between her and her fighting soul:  
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:  
Speak to her, Hamlet.

**Hamlet**

How is it with you, lady?

**Queen Gertrude**

Alas, how is't with you,  
That you do bend your eye on vacancy  
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?  
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;  
And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,  
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,  
Starts up, and stands on end. O gentle son,  
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper  
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?

**Hamlet**

On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares!  
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,  
Would make them capable. Do not look upon me;  
Lest with this piteous action you convert  
My stern effects: then what I have to do  
Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.

**Queen Gertrude**

To whom do you speak this?

**Hamlet**

Do you see nothing there?

**Queen Gertrude**

Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

**Hamlet**

Nor did you nothing hear?

**Queen Gertrude**

No, nothing but ourselves.

**Hamlet**

Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!  
My father, in his habit as he lived!  
Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!

*Exit Ghost*


**Queen Gertrude**

This the very coinage of your brain:  
This bodiless creation ecstasy  
Is very cunning in.

**Hamlet**

Ecstasy!  
My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,  
And makes as healthful music: it is not madness  
That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,  
And I the matter will re-word; which madness  
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,  
Lay not that mattering unction to your soul,  
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:  
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,  
Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,  
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;  
Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;  
And do not spread the compost on the weeds,  
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;  
For in the fatness of these pursy times  
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,  
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

**Queen Gertrude**

O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

**Hamlet**

O, throw away the worser part of it,  
And live the purer with the other half.  
Good night: but go not to mine uncle's bed;  
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.  
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,  
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,  
That to the use of actions fair and good  
He likewise gives a frock or livery,  
That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,  
And that shall lend a kind of easiness  
To the next abstinence: the next more easy;  
For use almost can change the stamp of nature,  
And either ... the devil, or throw him out  
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:  
And when you are desirous to be bless'd,  
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,
*Pointing to POLONIUS*  
I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,  
To punish me with this and this with me,  
That I must be their scourge and minister.  
I will bestow him, and will answer well  
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.  
I must be cruel, only to be kind:  
Thus bad begins and worse remains behind.  
One word more, good lady.

**Queen Gertrude**

What shall I do?

**Hamlet**

Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:  
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;  
Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;  
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,  
Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,  
Make you to ravel all this matter out,  
That I essentially am not in madness,  
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;  
For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,  
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,  
Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?  
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,  
Unpeg the basket on the house's top.  
Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape,  
To try conclusions, in the basket creep,  
And break your own neck down.

**Queen Gertrude**

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,  
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe  
What thou hast said to me.

**Hamlet**

I must to England; you know that?

**Queen Gertrude**

Alack,  
I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.

**Hamlet**

There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,  
Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,  
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way,  
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;  
For 'tis the sport to have the engineer  
Hoist with his own petard: and 't shall go hard  
But I will delve one yard below their mines,  
And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet,  
When in one line two crafts directly meet.  
This man shall set me packing:  
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.  
Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor  
Is now most still, most secret and most grave,  
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.  
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.  
Good night, mother.

*Exeunt severally; Hamlet dragging in Polonius*